Annotation docs (#335)
crystal-lang/crystal-book: syntax_and_semantics/annotations/user_defined_annotations.md

# User-defined annotations

Users can define their own annotations using the `annotation` keyword, which works similarly to defining a `class` or `struct`.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end
```

The annotation can then be applied to various types, including:

> * Instance and Class methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Instance and class methods
```

* Instance variables
* Classes, structs, and modules

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation]
def foo
  "foo"
end

@[MyAnnotation]
class Klass
end

@[MyAnnotation]
module MyModule
end
```

## Reading

Annotations can be read off of a [`TypeNode`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/TypeNode.html), [`Def`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Def.html), or [`MetaVar`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/MetaVar.html) using the `[]` method.  This method return an [`Annotation`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/master/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html) object representing the applied annotation of the supplied type.

**NOTE:** If multiple annotations of the same type are applied, the `annotation` method will return the _last_ one.

> The [@type](../macros.md#type-information) and [@def](../macros.md#method-information) variables can be used to get `TypeNode` or `Def` object to use the `annotation` method on.  However, it is also possible to get `TypeNode`/`Def` types using other methods on `TypeNode`.  For example `TypeNode.all_subclasses` or `TypeNode.methods` respectfully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [@type](../macros.md#type-information) and [@def](../macros.md#method-information) variables can be used to get `TypeNode` or `Def` object to use the `annotation` method on.  However, it is also possible to get `TypeNode`/`Def` types using other methods on `TypeNode`.  For example `TypeNode.all_subclasses` or `TypeNode.methods`, respectively.
```

Author: 😬 oops

      {{ivar.annotation(MyIvar).stringify}}
    {% end %}
  end
end

@[MyMethod]
def my_method
  {{@def.annotation(MyMethod).stringify}}
end

Foo.new.properties
my_method

# Which would print
"@[MyClass]"
"@[MyIvar]"
"@[MyIvar]"
"@[MyMethod]"
```

### Reading Multiple Annotations

If there are multiple annotations of the same type applied to the same instance variable/method/type, the `annotations(type : TypeNode)` method can be used.  This will work on anything that `annotation(type : TypeNode)` would, but instead returns an `ArrayLiteral(Annotation)`.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation("foo")]
@[MyAnnotation(123)]
@[MyAnnotation(123)]
def annotation_read
  {% for ann, idx in @def.annotations(MyAnnotation) %}
    pp "Annotation {{idx}} = {{ann[0].id}}"
  {% end %}
end

annotation_read

# Which would print
"Annotation 0 = foo"
"Annotation 1 = 123"
"Annotation 2 = 123"
```

## Fields

Data can be stored within an annotation.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotaion; end

# The fields can either be a key/value pair
@[MyAnnotation(key: "value", value: 123)]

# Or index based
@[MyAnnotation("foo", 123, false)]
```

### Key/value

> The values of key/value pairs would be readable at compile time via the [`[]`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28name%3ASymbolLiteral%7CStringLiteral%7CMacroId%29%3AASTNode-instance-method) method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The values of Annotation key/value pairs can be accessed at compile time via the [`[]`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28name%3ASymbolLiteral%7CStringLiteral%7CMacroId%29%3AASTNode-instance-method) method.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The values of annotation key/value pairs can be accessed at compile time via the [`[]`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28name%3ASymbolLiteral%7CStringLiteral%7CMacroId%29%3AASTNode-instance-method) method.
```

Rather use lowercase `annotation` since its lowercase everywhere else.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation(default: 2)]
def double(num : Number? = nil)
  # The name can be a `String`, `Symbol`, or `MacroId`
  2 * (num ? num : {{@def.annotation(MyAnnotation)[:default]}})
end

double 10 # => 20
double # => 4
```

### Indexed

> Values added without a key name can be read at compile time via the [`[]`](<https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28index%3ANumberLiteral%29%3AASTNode-instance-method>) method, however only one index can be read at a time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Values added without a key name can be accessed at compile time via the [`[]`](<https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28index%3ANumberLiteral%29%3AASTNode-instance-method>) method, however only one index can be read at a time.
```

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation(1,2,3,4)]
def annotation_read
  {% for idx in [0,1,2,3,4] %}
    {% value = @def.annotation(MyAnnotation)[idx] %}
    pp "{{idx}} = {{value}}"
  {% end %}
end

annotation_read

# Which would print
"0 = 1"
"1 = 2"
"2 = 3"
"3 = 4"
"4 = nil"
```

> ## Usages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Applications
```

> Annotations are best used to store metadata about a given instance variable, type, or method; so that it can be read at compile time using macros.  One of the main benefits of annotations is that they are applied directly to instance variables/methods. Because of this classes look more natural since a standard macro is not needed to create these properties/methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Annotations are best used to store metadata about a given instance variable, type, or method so that it can be read at compile time using macros.  One of the main benefits of annotations is that they are applied directly to instance variables/methods, which causes classes to look more natural since a standard macro is not needed to create these properties/methods.
```

> A few ideas that annotations could be useful for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A few applications for annotations:
```

### Object Serialization

> Have an annotation that when applied to an instance variable determines if that instance variable should be serialized, or with what key. Crystal's [`JSON::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/JSON/Serializable.html) and [`YAML::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/YAML/Serializable.html) are an example of this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Have an annotation that when applied to an instance variable determines if that instance variable should be serialized, or with what key. Crystal's [`JSON::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/JSON/Serializable.html) and [`YAML::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/YAML/Serializable.html) are examples of this.
```

> # User Defined Annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# User-defined annotations
```

Users can define their own annotations using the `annotation` keyword, which works similarly to defining `class` or `sruct`.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end
```

> The annotation can then be applied to various types, including:

Reviewer: The list below does not really include any type.

Author: ```suggestion
The annotation can then be applied to various items, including:
```
?

* Instance and class methods
* Instance variables
* Classes, structs, and modules

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation]
def foo
  "foo"
end

@[MyAnnotation]
class Klass
end

@[MyAnnotation]
module MyModule
end
```

> ## Reading

Reviewer 3: Using annotations in macros is a very in-depth topic. Fields and applications should definitely come first.

```crystal
annotation MyClass; end
annotation MyMethod; end
annotation MyIvar; end

@[MyClass]
class Foo
  {{@type.annotation(MyClass).stringify}}
  
  @[MyIvar]
  @num : Int32 = 1
  
  @[MyIvar]
  property name : String = "jim"

  def properties
    {% for ivar in @type.instance_vars %}
      {{ivar.annotation(MyIvar).stringify}}
    {% end %}
  end
end

@[MyMethod]
def my_method
  {{@def.annotation(MyMethod).stringify}}
end

Foo.new.properties
my_method

# Which would print
"@[MyClass]"
"@[MyIvar]"
"@[MyIvar]"
"@[MyMethod]"
```

### Reading Multiple Annotations

If there are multiple annotations of the same type applied to the same instance variable/method/type, the `annotations(type : TypeNode)` method can be used.  This will work on anything that `annotation(type : TypeNode)` would, but instead returns an `ArrayLiteral(Annotation)`.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation("foo")]
@[MyAnnotation(123)]
@[MyAnnotation(123)]
def annotation_read
  {% for ann, idx in @def.annotations(MyAnnotation) %}
    pp "Annotation {{idx}} = {{ann[0].id}}"
  {% end %}
end

annotation_read

# Which would print
"Annotation 0 = foo"
"Annotation 1 = 123"
"Annotation 2 = 123"
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Fields

Data can be stored within an annotation.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotaion; end

# The fields can either be a key/value pair
@[MyAnnotation(key: "value", value: 123)]

# Or index based
@[MyAnnotation("foo", 123, false)]
```

### Key/value

> The values of key/value pairs would be readable at compile time via the [`[]`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28name%3ASymbolLiteral%7CStringLiteral%7CMacroId%29%3AASTNode-instance-method)  method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The values of key/value pairs would be readable at compile time via the [`[]`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28name%3ASymbolLiteral%7CStringLiteral%7CMacroId%29%3AASTNode-instance-method) method.
```

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation(default: 2)]
def double(num : Number? = nil)
  # The name can be a `String`, `Symbol`, or `MacroId`
  2 * (num ? num : {{@def.annotation(MyAnnotation)[:default]}})
end

double 10 # => 20
double # => 4
```

### Indexed

> Values added without a key name can be read at compile time via the [`[]`](<https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28index%3ANumberLiteral%29%3AASTNode-instance-method>)  method, however only one index can be read at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values added without a key name can be read at compile time via the [`[]`](<https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28index%3ANumberLiteral%29%3AASTNode-instance-method>) method, however only one index can be read at a time.
```

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation(1,2,3,4)]
def annotation_read
  {% for idx in [0,1,2,3,4] %}
    {% value = @def.annotation(MyAnnotation)[idx] %}
    pp "{{idx}} = {{value}}"
  {% end %}
end

annotation_read

# Which would print
"0 = 1"
"1 = 2"
"2 = 3"
"3 = 4"
"4 = nil"
```

## Usages

> Annotations are best used to store metadata about a given instance variable, type, or method; so that it can be read at compile time using macros.  One of the main benefits of annotations is that they are applied directly to instance_variables/methods.  Because of this classes look more natural since a standard macro is not needed to create these properties/methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Annotations are best used to store metadata about a given instance variable, type, or method; so that it can be read at compile time using macros.  One of the main benefits of annotations is that they are applied directly to instance variables/methods. Because of this classes look more natural since a standard macro is not needed to create these properties/methods.
```

A few ideas that annotations could be useful for:

### Object Serialization

> Have an annotation that when applied to an instance variable determines if that instance_variable should be serialized, or with what key.  Crystal's [`JSON::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/JSON/Serializable.html) and [`YAML::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/YAML/Serializable.html) are an example of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have an annotation that when applied to an instance variable determines if that instance variable should be serialized, or with what key. Crystal's [`JSON::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/JSON/Serializable.html) and [`YAML::Serializable`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/YAML/Serializable.html) are an example of this.
```

### ORMs

> An annotation could be used to designate a property as an ORM column.  The name and type of the instance variable can be read off the `TypeNode` in addition to the annotation; removing the need for any ORM specific macro.  The annotation itself could also be used to store metadata bout the column, such as if it is nullable, the name of the column, or if it is the primary key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An annotation could be used to designate a property as an ORM column. The name and type of the instance variable can be read off the `TypeNode` in addition to the annotation; removing the need for any ORM specific macro. The annotation itself could also be used to store metadata about the column, such as if it is nullable, the name of the column, or if it is the primary key.
```

# User-defined annotations

Users can define their own annotations using the `annotation` keyword, which works similarly to defining a `class` or `struct`.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end
```

The annotation can then be applied to various items, including:
* Instance and class methods
* Instance variables
* Classes, structs, and modules

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation]
def foo
  "foo"
end

@[MyAnnotation]
class Klass
end

@[MyAnnotation]
module MyModule
end
```

## Reading

> Annotations can be read off of a [`TypeNode`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/TypeNode.html), [`Def`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Def.html), or [`MetaVar`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/MetaVar.html) using the `[]` method.  This method return an [`Annotation`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/master/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html) object representing the applied annotation of the supplied type.

Reviewer 4: Isn't it the `.annotation` method instead of `[]`?

Author: `.annotation` returns the `Annotation` type object from the `TypeNode`.  However `[]` is used to read a named/positional value from the annotation.

**NOTE:** If multiple annotations of the same type are applied, the `annotation` method will return the _last_ one.

> The [@type](../macros.md#type-information) and [@def](../macros.md#method-information) variables can be used to get `TypeNode` or `Def` object to use the `annotation` method on.  However, it is also possible to get `TypeNode`/`Def` types using other methods on `TypeNode`.  For example `TypeNode.all_subclasses` or `TypeNode.methods`, respectively.

Reviewer 4: ``[`@type`](...)``?

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation("foo")]
@[MyAnnotation(123)]
@[MyAnnotation(123)]
def annotation_read
  {% for ann, idx in @def.annotations(MyAnnotation) %}
    pp "Annotation {{idx}} = {{ann[0].id}}"
  {% end %}
end

annotation_read

# Which would print
"Annotation 0 = foo"
"Annotation 1 = 123"
"Annotation 2 = 123"
```

## Fields

Data can be stored within an annotation.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotaion; end

# The fields can either be a key/value pair
@[MyAnnotation(key: "value", value: 123)]

# Or positional
@[MyAnnotation("foo", 123, false)]
```

### Key/value

The values of annotation key/value pairs can be accessed at compile time via the [`[]`](https://crystal-lang.org/api/Crystal/Macros/Annotation.html#%5B%5D%28name%3ASymbolLiteral%7CStringLiteral%7CMacroId%29%3AASTNode-instance-method) method.

```crystal
annotation MyAnnotation; end

@[MyAnnotation(default: 2)]
def double(num : Number? = nil)
  # The name can be a `String`, `Symbol`, or `MacroId`
  2 * (num ? num : {{@def.annotation(MyAnnotation)[:default]}})

> end

Reviewer 5: This exemple is soo weird, the end goal would have been simpler using a proper default value in the method definition!

I know I don't have any suggestion, but I think we should try to find a more interesting exemple here

Author: Yea....However it's kinda hard to come up with actual examples that annotations would be useful in, that is simple enough to show.  So, if you have any ideas let me know :)

Reviewer 4: Probably just print the `2` value if you can't think of a "real" example.
